005 filter api to expose client and server tls info (#73)
kroxylicious/design: proposals/005-filter-api-to-expose-client-and-server-tls-info.md

# Authentication APIs

> This proposal describes a set of public APIs to expose client identity to plugin implementations.
> It makes use of [proposal-004](proposal-004) for the terminology used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal describes a set of public APIs to expose client and server TLS certificates for downstream-to-proxy and proxy-to-upstream connections to plugin implementations.
It makes use of [proposal-004](proposal-004) for the terminology used.
```

## Current situation

The `Filter` and `FilterContext` APIs currently don't directly expose any authenticated client identity information.
Specifically if clients are authenticating using SASL, the only way a `Filter` can know about that is by intercepting those frames.
* identity-using filters in the chain must _each_ implement SASL passthrough inspection. 

> * but this is usually incompatible with use of a filter performing SASL Termination or SASL Initiation.

Reviewer 2: I'm with Rob,  I'm not following why a discussion of SASL support is relevant to this proposal

* Allow access to TLS-specific details by plugins should they need them.
* Provide a flexible API to make serving niche use cases possible (though perhaps not simple).

## Proposal

### API for Filters to access client TLS information

TLS (in contrast to SASL) is handled entirely by the proxy runtime. 
By the time a `Filter` is instantiated the proxy already has an established TLS connection.
All that's required is an API for exposing appropriate details to `Filters`.

The following method will be added to the existing `FilterContext` interface:

```java
    /**
     * @return The TLS context for the connection between the Kafka client and the proxy, 
     * or empty if the client connection is not TLS.
     */
    Optional<ClientTlsContext> clientTlsContext();
```

Where `ClientTlsContext` is a new interface in the new package `io.kroxylicious.proxy.tls`:

```
package io.kroxylicious.proxy.tls;

import java.security.cert.X509Certificate;
import java.util.Optional;

> public interface ClientTlsContext {

Reviewer 2: While I have fewer issues with calling this `ClientTlsContext` than I do with `ServerTlsContext` I think this is better named `DownstreamTlsContext`.

    /**
     * @return The TLS server certificate that the proxy presented to the client during TLS handshake.
     */
    X509Certificate proxyServerCertificate();

    /**
     * @return the TLS client certificate was presented by the Kafka client to the proxy during TLS handshake, 
     * or empty if no TLS client certificate was presented.
     */
    Optional<X509Certificate> clientCertificate();

}
```

Having a distinct type, `ClientTlsContext`, means we can easily expose the same information to future plugins that are not filters (and thus do not have access to a `FilterContext`).

### API for Filters to access server TLS information

The API for exposing the proxy-to-broker TLS information to `Filters` is very similar to the client one. The following method will be added to `FilterContext`:

```java
    /**
     * @return The TLS context for the connection between the proxy and the Kafka server, 
     * or empty if the server connection is not TLS.
     */
    Optional<ServerTlsContext> serverTlsContext();
```

Where

```java
package io.kroxylicious.proxy.tls;

import java.security.cert.X509Certificate;
import java.util.Optional;

> public interface ServerTlsContext {

Reviewer 2: I was wondering about changing `server` to `broker` here but then remembered we want to retain the idea we can proxy controllers as well so we are back to the usual `upstream` vs `server` argument. 

I still think `upstream` is clearer and entirely unambiguous where as server is not.

    /**

>      * @return The TLS server certificate that the proxy presented to the server during TLS handshake,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     * @return The TLS client certificate that the proxy presented to the server during TLS handshake,
```

     * or empty if no TLS client certificate was presented during TLS handshake.
     */
    Optional<X509Certificate> proxyClientCertificate();

>     /**
>      * @return the TLS server certificate was presented by the Kafka server to the proxy during TLS handshake.
>      */
>     X509Certificate serverCertificate();

Reviewer 2: Upstream clearly conveys that it is the remote certificate and avoids needing to talk about `Kafka server` which is not normal parlance when discussing Kafka.

```suggestion
    /**
     * @return the TLS server certificate was presented by the remote Kafka process to the proxy during TLS handshake.
     */
    X509Certificate upstreamCertificate();
```

# Authentication APIs

This proposal describes a set of public APIs to expose client identity to plugin implementations.

> ## Terminology

Reviewer: should be a pointer to the other doc

It is possible for a proxy to be perform neither, one, or both, of SASL Termination and SASL Initiation.

Finally, let's define some concepts from JAAS:

* A **subject** represents a participant in the protcol (a client or server).
* A **principal** identifies a subject. 
  A subject may have zero or more principals. 
  Subjects that haven't authenticated will have no principals.
  A subject gains a principal following a successful TLS handshake.
  A subject also gains a principal following a successful `SaslAuthenticate` exchange.
* A **credential** is information used to prove the authenticity of a principal.
* A **public credential**, such as a TLS certificate, does not need not be kept secret.
* A **private credential**, such as a TLS private key or a password, must be kept secret, otherwise the authenticity of a principal is compromised.

## Current situation

The `Filter` and `FilterContext` APIs currently don't directly expose any authenticated client identity information.
Specifically:

* If proxy uses client mTLS, then filters don't have access to a `Subject` or `Principal` corresponding to the client's TLS client certificate.

> * If clients are authenticating using SASL, the only way a `Filter` can know about that is by intercepting those frames.

Reviewer: could drop the SASL stuff from the mTLS doc

    - identity-using filters in the chain must _each_ implement SASL passthrough inspection. 
    - but this is usually incompatible with use of a filter performing SASL Termination or SASL Initiation.

## Motivation

The lack of API support makes implementing client identity aware plugins difficult, or impossible.

Goals: 

* Allow the possibility for new kinds of KRPC intercepting plugins in the future by not assuming that `Filters` are the only kind of KRPC intercepting plugin. We'll use the term **plugin**, unless saying something specifically about `Filters`.

> * Enable plugins to access a client's identity using a single, consistent API, irrespective of which authentication mechanism(s) are being used, TLS or SASL, and whether they're implemented by the proxy runtime (in the TLS case), or a prior plugin in the chain (in the SASL termination case).

Reviewer: this has dropped out of the proposals

> * Allow access to TLS- or SASL-specific details by plugins should they need them.

Reviewer: could drop the sasl big

> * Don't require a plugin to handle `SaslAuthenticate` unless it is performing SASL termination or initiation.

Reviewer: drop the sasl bit

* Provide a flexible API to make serving niche use cases possible (though perhaps not simple).

> * Drop support for the "raw" (i.e. not encapsulated within the Kafka protocol) support for SASL, as [Kafka itself has does from Kafka 4.0](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-896%3A+Remove+old+client+protocol+API+versions+in+Kafka+4.0)

Reviewer: drop SASL bit

```

Where

```java
package io.kroxylicious.proxy.tls;

import java.security.cert.X509Certificate;
import java.util.Optional;

public interface ServerTlsContext {
    /**
     * @return The TLS server certificate that the proxy presented to the server during TLS handshake,
     * or empty if no TLS client certificate was presented during TLS handshake.
     */
    Optional<X509Certificate> proxyClientCertificate();

    /**
     * @return the TLS server certificate was presented by the Kafka server to the proxy during TLS handshake.
     */
    X509Certificate serverCertificate();
}
```

## Affected/not affected projects

The `kroxylicous` repo.

## Compatibility

This change would be backwards compatible for `Filter` developers and proxy users (i.e. all existing proxy configurations files would still be valid).

# Future work

* Implement a 1st party `SaslInspector` filter.
* Implement a 1st party `SaslTerminator` filter.
* Implement a 1st party `SaslInitiator` filter.
* A `PrincipalBuilder` API for customizing the concrete type of `Principal` exposed to `Filters` using `FilterContext.clientPrincipal()`
* A common authorization API.

> 

Reviewer: can be dropped
